I"<p>Tomorrow is the four year anniversary of my friend’s passing. It’s something I’ve meticulously etched into my mind, because it’s the least I can do for being a subpar friend. April 14th, 2016. Avril 14th. Same date, same pain. <br />
I know exactly why they left, but I still have a lot of questions that will remain unanswered. Some have been answered after doing some inspector work, and sometimes I wish I never found her journal. I’d be a liar if I said I didn’t notice she needed more help than she got, because I did notice, but I didn’t know how to broach the topic or help. After four years of painful contemplation, I realized help doesn’t mean you escort them to their therapy sessions or make sure they’re taking their medication. Sometimes, it’s about the simple gestures that make them feel less alone. Reaching out to them everyday and speaking with them like you did before they got really sick, but being mindful of their conditions, is one thing that helps to fend off loneliness. Inviting them over to your place is also a better way than just texting or videochatting, since you can physically connect. Seeing and hearing the subtle changes in their expressions and tones and acting accordingly to accommodate.</p>

<p>The difficult part for me was not listening to the unsure voices in my head that told me otherwise. If they want to talk to you, they would reach out. Give them space. It’s too awkward anyway, what the hell do you know about what they’re going through? It’s not like they’ll do anything anyway, so just wait it out until they reach out. You’re really busy, so they’ll understand if you can’t talk that much. With this, I fell into a pit of excuses while I pushed my conscience away. If you can’t think about it, then you don’t have to deal with it. They’ll come to you.</p>

<p>Come to me, they did, not with good news, but bad news. A wake at night, then a funeral in the morning. It was all so fast, and I couldn’t look at anyone in the eyes. I liked how your mom was honest about your cause of death instead of shrinking away to appease those who can’t handle heavy topics. I still remember how little of our high school friends showed up and how you would have liked the quartet playing in remembrance of you. I couldn’t believe that you were gone. We talked about this before, in hypotheticals; we talked about all the details and nooks and crannies. Just a few months back, we were talking about your funeral and how you wanted me to disallow a certain someone from attending your funeral. I felt like I betrayed you when that person came to your wake.</p>

<p>Sometimes, I wish I had said something. Not just to that specific person, but to almost all the people that came. How dare do people come to say their respects as a friend when you didn’t treat them nicely when they were alive? Who gave you permission? Your guilt? There was a lot of anger I swallowed because I was just as guilty as them. I might have been one of the few whom she regularly (underestimation) talked with, but I was closer to her, which meant I had more responsibility. In that sense, wasn’t I guiltier than them? The anger I projected to others reflected back into my eyes. Instead of becoming blind like the sun usually does, I became too aware of the glare in its every detail. There was always someone or something I wanted to blame because it would have implied a definite sense of knowing, since knowledge gives you control based on what you know. Nothing is worse than silence. I also wanted to free myself of my personal guilt; I just wanted persmission to wash the blood off my hands.</p>

<p>It’s been four years where I have managed to wash some blood off. Despite the cleanse, I was affected. It has made me bitter, untrusting, and lonely because people have shown that they don’t care as much as they say. Ironically, being one of those people showed me how I also wasn’t a great friend and how my actions (or inactions) indirectly ended in such tragedy. Self-hatred is a large, looming cloud that float every so often. It is not helping that I still have trouble going to their grave. It’s been two years since I’ve visited.</p>

<p>This is ultimately my lonely path that no one will truly understand. It’s just a matter of growing calluses and learning to walk properly.</p>
:ET